+++
date = "2015-06-20T14:02:37+02:00"
title = "DISSERTATION"
description = "."
hidden = true
+++

Antitrust laws were created at the end of the 19th century in the United States with the goal of preventing concentration of economic power in the hands of a few corporations, yet they have become “irrelevant” to controlling corporate size and market power in this country since the 1980s. The courts and the antitrust agencies have shifted their attention from lowering market concentration to protecting “consumer welfare,” that is the “maximization of wealth and consumer want satisfaction” or economic efficiency (Kovacic 2003). As a result, most corporate behaviors that legislators of the Sherman Act originally intended to prohibit now go unpunished, while market concentration in every sector of the US economy continues to increase (Jarsulic et al. 2016; Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold 2018; De Loecker and Eeckhout 2018).  

At the same time outside the US, competition laws increasingly became “relevant” to creating globally connected markets for trade negotiators and international organizations, and to securing the future of the market-friendly economic policy reforms in the Global South. The emergence of competition law as a global enterprise is a remarkable development. Once an American idiosyncrasy, the number of jurisdictions with competition laws increased from roughly 30 in late 1980s to more than 160 today (Kovacic and Lopex-Galdos 2016). Many recent adopters are non-Western developing economies that once seemed committed to state-planning and government ownership for economic development. Many of these adoptions happened under free-trade agreements and encouragements from international trade organizations (Bradford and Buthe 2015).

In order to unpack this puzzle, my dissertation offers three layers of research: national-historical (focusing on the US history of antitrust), international (focusing on the global diffusion of competition laws) and cross-national (focusing on two developing economies that recently adopted antitrust laws, Turkey and Mexico). Each of these layers is also conceived as an individual research paper.  

##### 1.	Whose Paradigm Is It Anyway? The US Antitrust Law Shift in the Times of Economic Crises and the Chicago School Law and Economics (available upon request)

First, focusing on the history of Antitrust Laws in the US, I examine how antitrust laws shifted away from a century-old commitment to a more equitable distribution of economic power, to increasing “consumer welfare” or aggregate output in the economy. Existing theories suggests that major policy changes are influenced by “paradigm shifts”, but these shifts have to be situated in political and economic contexts where the actors’ shifting policy positions are not politically costly and institutionally possible. Looking at enforcement data, I find three signature changes in antitrust enforcement during this shift: the disappearance of the restrictions over monopoly conducts, criminalization of cartelistic agreements between competitors, and regulatory approach to mergers and acquisitions (M&As). Relying on new data from the Congressional records, I show that in response to the rise in consumer movements, fears of conglomerate mergers and confusion over economic stagflation, the US Congress strengthened the criminal prosecution of cartels and turned the prosecutorial procedures into regulatory procedures for the M&As in the 1970s. These legal reforms ironically allowed the antitrust enforcement authorities to reduce monopoly restrictions through enforcement policy changes in the 1980s. This finding indicates that, contrary to previous studies, the shift in the US Antitrust law and policy was not (solely) due to “paradigm shifts” in legal scholarship, nor the influence of corporate lobbyists, but was (also) a result of the political responses to the events and social mobilizations that made antitrust laws briefly more politically salient during the turbulent times of the 1970s.   

##### 2.	Global Diffusion Under Politically Flexible Roles: The Case of Competition Laws

Second, examining the three major waves of competition law diffusion to from the US to the rest of the World through archival documents, policy papers and secondary resources, I theorize that competition laws are flexible set of behavioral rules for corporations that can easily take on different political purposes in the current system of integrated national markets. During the first wave in the aftermath of the Second World War, the adoption of anti-cartel laws in Germany and Japan was forced by the US occupation in order to reduce corporate power which was seen as the main impediment on democracy and peace. In the second wave of diffusion in the 1960s, new European countries adopted national competition laws and a supranational competition authority in order to prevent preferential treatment of national companies by states within the emerging European common market. In the third and last wave of diffusion during the 1990s, prominent organizations like the World Trade Organization (WTO) and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), with the help of the US and the EU, promoted new competition laws in the non-Western developing economies with the purpose of protecting their recent market liberalization and opening reforms from being reversed by governments. This section shows that in each wave, different ideas and political interests were at play, which creates major problems of enforcement “harmonization” that the current system of global institutions is still not equipped to deal with.  Generalizing beyond the case of competition laws, this finding highlights the importance of the political flexibility of legal rules, in addition to the other processes of “coercion”, “learning” and “competition” examined in the literature, in creating legal diffusion under economic globalization. 

##### 3.	Distributing Benefits After Neoliberalism: Monopolies, States and Competition Policy in Turkey and Mexico

Lastly, I examine how competition laws were “localized” in non-Western developing economies after the last diffusion wave by looking at the cases of Turkey and Mexico. Based on policy documents, detailed enforcement data and interviews with experts, I show that these countries’ competition law systems differ substantially from the established ‘models’ of the EU and US competition laws, which they were forced to imitate under exceptionally broad trade agreements in the 1990s. The existing institutional capacity- and business culture-based explanations are insufficient to explain Turkey and Mexico’s divergence from both these Western advanced economies and from each other. Instead, I argue that legal diffusion is not dictated by external pressures and subverted locally, but shaped by the economic and political groups that control the neoliberal transformation process in order to protect their interests and solidify their economic gains in the aftermath of the reforms. This influence is direct on the initial design of the laws, but also reproduced by the ongoing enforcement decisions made by the enforcement authorities and bureaucratic expertise fields. Specifically, the broader interpretation of constitutional due-process rights and bureaucratic reliance on the US-trained economist experts in Mexico allowed large corporations to continue to evade competition enforcement, while the weakness of due-process rights and the absence of economist experts in Turkey biased the enforcement towards larger corporations. This research also shows that, as the literature argues, the global connections between competition authorities and experts prompted some policy “harmonization” reforms, but these reforms ultimately failed in the face of these broader resisting structures. These findings challenge the “regulatory capture” theory for offering simplistic accounts on economic interest influences and the “epistemic communities” literature for exaggerating the power global diffusion of ideas over policies.


##### References

Kovacic, W. E. (2003). The modern evolution of US competition policy enforcement norms. Antitrust LJ, 71, 377

Jarsulic, Marc, Ethan Gurwitz, Kate Bahn, and Andy Green. 2016. “Reviving Antitrust: Why Our Economy Needs a Progressive Competition Policy.” Center for American Progress Report, 14–21.

Leonhardt, David. 2018. “Opinion | The Monopolization of America.” The New York Times, November 25, 2018, sec. Opinion. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/25/opinion/monopolies-in-the-us.html. 

De Loecker, Jan, and Jan Eeckhout. 2018. “Global Market Power.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., Jacob A. Robbins, and Ella Getz Wold. 2018. “Kaldor and Piketty’s Facts: The Rise of Monopoly Power in the United States.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kovacic, W. E., & Lopez-Galdos, M. (2016). Lifecycles of Competition Systems: Explaining Variation in the Implementation of New Regimes. Law & Contemp. Probs., 79, 85

Bradford, Anu, and Tim Buthe. "Competition policy and free trade: Antitrust provisions in PTAs." (2015).



